feat(containers): product handbook doc (#5018)
scaleway/docs-content: pages/serverless-containers/reference-content/serverless-handbook.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Serverless ecosystem handbook
  description: Understand the concepts and benefits of Serverless computing on Scaleway.
content:
  h1: Serverless ecosystem handbook
  paragraph: Understand the concepts and benefits of Serverless computing on Scaleway.
tags: containers serverless
dates:
  validation: 2025-05-23
  posted: 2025-05-23
categories:
  - serverless
  - containers
---

# What is Serverless Compute?

Serverless computing is a cloud computing model where the cloud providers manages the infrastructure and dynamically alocates computing resources as needed.

> This means that you don't have to provision machines, manage a cluster or pay for servers. Your application code is executed on demand and you only pay for the compute time consumed by your software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that there is no need to provision machines, manage a cluster, or pay for servers. Your application code is executed on demand, and you only pay for the computing time consumed by your software.
```

> This approach enables greater scalability, flexibility and cost-effectiveness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach enables greater scalability, flexibility, and cost-effectiveness.
```

Key features:

> * **Automatic scaling:** your application can scale up or down automatically based on demand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Automatic scaling:** Your application can scale up or down automatically based on demand
```

> * **No server management:** you don't need to provision, maintain or manage servers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **No server management:** No need to provision, maintain, or manage servers
```

> * **Pay as ou go:** you only pay for the compute time you consume, making it cost effective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Pay as you go:** Only pay for the compute time you consume, making it cost-effective
```

Serverless is not limited to Serverless Functions which is perfect to deploy small chunks of code, it can also directly deploy containers on Serverless Containers and Serverless Jobs.
Refer to the [differences between Functions, Jobs, and Containers](/serverless-containers/reference-content/difference-jobs-functions-containers/) for more information on Scaleway's different Serverless products.

# Why Serverless?

Serverless offers numerous advantages that can significantly enhance your development and operational efficiency:

* **Cost savings:** You only pay for the compute time your code uses, which can lead to significant cost reductions. No idle resources

> * **Scalability:** Automatically scale your applications to handle varying loads without manual intervention. It's perfect for seasonal traffic and viral apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Scalability:** Automatically scale your applications to handle varying loads without manual intervention. It is perfect for seasonal traffic and viral apps
```

* **Faster time to market:** Focus on writing code rather than managing infrastructure, accelerating your development cycles
* **Reduced operational overhead:** Let the cloud provider handle server maintenance, updates, and scaling, freeing up your team to focus on innovation
* **Eco friendly:**  Optimized resource usage reduces wasted energy

> * **Focus on apps:** you can put all your energy in application value instead of managing infrastructure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Focus on apps:** you can put all your energy into the application value instead of managing infrastructure
```

> # How to control costs of Serverless?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to control the costs of Serverless?
```

> Serverless is inherently cost-transparent, tips to otpimize costs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serverless is inherently cost-transparent, tips to optimize costs:
```

* **Cost estimator:** when deploying Serverless resources via Scaleway Console, you can try different parameters to evaluate costs
* **Best practices** Use efficient code with optimized libraries, ensuring a small resource footprint
* **Monitoring** Monitor usage with built-in observability and use Cost Manager: [How to use cost manager documentation](/billing/how-to/use-the-cost-manager/)
* **Parameters** Define a max-scale setting according to traffic spikes

Remember: Serverless eliminates upfront capital expenses and reduces operational costs giving you predictable, granular billing.

# Ready to go Serverless?

By adopting Serverless, you are choosing agility, innovation, and cost savings.
Whether you are a startup scaling rapidly or an enterprise modernizing legacy systems, Serverless lets you focus on what matters: delivering value to your users.

You can fully deploy your API on Serverless or use it to emporer and add automation to your infrastructure.
Serverless is excellent at handling traffic spikes, useful to offload regular servers on special events.

> # Is my applicaiton a good fit for Serverless?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Is my application a good fit for serverless?
```

# How do I debug and monitor applications in a Serverless environment?

Scaleway provides full observability:

* **Logs and metrics:** Centralized logging and real-time metrics via Cockpit
* **Local debugging:** Test containers locally using the Serverless CLI and emulator
* **Error Reporting:** Automatic alerts for failed invocations or resource bottlenecks via Cockpit. See [how to configure alerts for Serverless Containers](/serverless-containers/how-to/configure-alerts-containers/)

As our Serverless environment does not encourage vendor-locking, you can easily debug your container locally.

# Will Serverless lock me into the ecosystem?

No. Scaleway Serverless is designed to minimize vendor lock-in.
We believe in empowering your freedom to choose, adapt, and evolve. Here is how we ensure flexibility:

## Container portability
- **Docker compatibility**: Your container images (built with Docker, Helm, or other tools) are portable. You can redeploy them elsewhere—on-premises, on other clouds, or in hybrid environments.

> - **No proprietary formats**: We don't modify your containers. What you build works anywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **No proprietary formats**: We do not modify your containers. What you build works anywhere.
```

## No proprietary lock-in
- **No forced dependencies**: Some providers require customers to import specific libraries to work properly. We do not.

> - **Open APIs**: Manage Serverless Containers via REST APIs, Terraform, CLI, etc... no proprietary control required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Open APIs**: Manage Serverless Containers via REST APIs, Terraform, CLI, and more with no proprietary control required.
```

# How to migrate to Serverless ecosystem?

Serverless products at Scaleway allows you to gradually migrate to Serverless, different strategies are possible:

## Start small

* **Small workloads:** Migrate non-critical workloads first like internal APIs, automation jobs to Serverless Jobs
* **Proof of concept:** Use our tutorial and check our [scaleway/serverless-examples repository](https://github.com/scaleway/serverless-examples) for inspiration

## Hybrid architecture

> * **Coexistance:** Run serverless endpoints alongside VM, clusters and traditional apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Coexistence:** Run serverless endpoints alongside VMs, clusters, and traditional apps
```

## Incremental refactoring

* **Break monoliths:** Convert microservices or stateless components to Serverless first

# What specific knowledge is required to deploy Serverless projects?

> Serverless is designed to eliminate infrastructure complexity , so teams can focus on innovation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serverless is designed to eliminate infrastructure complexity, so teams can focus on innovation:
```

## No infrastructure expertise needed

* **Managed services:** Scaleway handles networking, scaling, patching, and availability
* **Simplified operations:** No need for DevOps engineers to manage clusters or servers

## Developer-centric workflow

* **Familiar tools:** Use Git, Docker, CI/CD pipelines, and IDEs you already know
* **Language flexibility:** Support for Python, Node.js, Rust, Go, PHP, and custom runtimes via Serverless Containers

## Learn Serverless basics

* **Minimal learning curve:* Teams only need to understand event-driven architecture, container basics, and Scaleway’s serverless console/CLI
* **Training resources:** Free tutorials, examples, and free-tier to experiment

> # Is Servereless a good choice for a growing business?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Is Serverless a good choice for a growing business?
```
